Execution Hierarchy in the System
Before detailing the scheduler, it is fundamental to understand the execution hierarchy:

text
WORK (Set of PROCESSES)

│
├── PROCESS (Container of TASKS)

│ │
│ ├── TASK (Execution container with unique ID)
│ │ │
│ │ ├── THREAD (Execution unit)
│ │ │ │
│ │ │ └── ACTIVITY (Atomic unit executed by the THREAD)

│ │ │
│ │ └── [Virtual Memory Space, [KSPC/KHPC Ports]

│ │
│ └── TASK ...

│
└── PROCESS ...
ACTIVITY: Atomic unit of processing (what is executed)

THREAD: Unit of execution that processes ACTIVITIES

TASK: Container that encapsulates THREADS, virtual memory, and communication

PROCESS: Container that manages multiple TASKS

WORK: Set of PROCESSES that collaborate towards a common goal

The EEVDF scheduler operates at the THREAD level, deciding which THREAD will execute on each CPU core at any given time.

EEVDF Overview
EEVDF (Earliest Eligible Virtual Deadline First) is the proportional 
scheduling algorithm used in the Bible kernel to manage the execution of THREADS.
Located in the proc/sched_prim.c file, this scheduler ensures fair distribution of CPU time with predictable latency.

EEVDF Philosophy

Unlike schedulers based solely on priorities or fixed time slices, EEVDF introduces two fundamental concepts:

Eligibility: A THREAD can only be scheduled when it reaches an "eligible" state based on its execution history.

Virtual Deadline: Each THREAD receives a virtual deadline that must be respected, providing latency guarantees.

Fundamental Concepts
1. Virtual Time
Each THREAD maintains a virtual time that progresses inversely proportional to its weight:

virtual_time = real_time / weight
Implications:

THREADS with higher weight (higher priority) accumulate virtual time more slowly.

THREADS with lower weight accumulate virtual time faster.

The scheduler always searches for the THREAD with the lowest eligible virtual time.

2. Eligibility
A THREAD is considered eligible for execution when its current virtual time is greater than or equal to a calculated threshold:

eligible = (current_virtual_time >= minimum_virtual_time)
The minimum virtual time is dynamic and depends on:

Recent execution time of the THREAD

Thread weight in the queue

Latency guarantees configured in the system

3. Virtual Deadline
Each THREAD receives a virtual deadline when inserted into the execution queue:

text
deadline = current_virtual_time + (base_slice / weight)
Where:

base_slice is the fundamental timeslice of the system (configurable)

The deadline is recalculated whenever the THREAD is (re)inserted into the queue

THREADS with closer deadlines have priority, provided they are eligible

EEVDF Architecture
Main Data Structures
Execution Queue per Core (Runqueue)
Each CPU core maintains its own execution queue:

text
RUNQUEUE (per core)

├── Current THREAD in execution

├── Executable THREADS (balanced tree)

├── Load statistics
└── Execution history
Schedulable Entity
Each THREAD is represented in the scheduler by an entity that contains:

Identification: ID of the THREAD and the parent TASK

Virtual Time: Current vruntime value

Weight: Derived from the THREAD priority

Deadline: Next virtual deadline for execution

Eligibility: Flag indicating whether it is eligible

Status: Running, executable, blocked, etc.

Scheduling Algorithm
1. Insertion into the Queue
When a THREAD becomes executable (wakes up or is created):

text
1. Update queue time
2. Calculate initial virtual time based on:

- If it's new: use minimum queue time

- If it's waking up: adjust for the sleeping time
3. Calculate virtual deadline:

deadline = virtual_time + (base_slice / weight)
4. Insert into the balanced tree ordered by virtual time
5. Update total queue load
2. Selection of the Next THREAD
The heart of EEVDF - selecting the best THREAD to execute:

text
1. Get the THREAD with the shortest virtual time in the queue
2. Check the eligibility of each candidate THREAD
3. Among the eligible ones, select the one with the shortest deadline
4. If none are eligible, use the one with the shortest virtual time
5. Prepare the selected THREAD for execution
3. Eligibility Check
A THREAD is eligible If:

text
difference = deadline - virtual_time
limit = difference / 2
eligible = (virtual_time + limit) >= minimum_queue_time
This ensures that THREADS that are far behind the minimum queue time cannot execute until they get closer.

4. Update During Execution
While a THREAD is running:

text
At each time tick:

1. Calculate executed_time = now - start_execution
2. Update virtual_time += (executed_time / weight)
3. Update THREAD statistics
4. Check if deadline has passed:

If virtual_time > deadline:

Mark for re-evaluation on the next tick
5. Update minimum queue time
5. Removal from Queue
When a THREAD blocks or is suspended

text
1. Update final virtual_time
2. Remove from execution tree
3. Update queue load
4. If it was the current THREAD, schedule the next one
Configurable Parameters
The scheduler exposes parameters adjustable by the administrator:

Parameter Description Impact
base_slice Fundamental timeslice (default: 3ms) Lower = more responsive, higher = more throughput
latency_threshold Limit for latency warnings Helps detect scheduling problems
maximum_migration Maximum number of THREADS migrated at a time Controls load balancing overhead
EEVDF Features
The scheduler can be configured with different features enabled/disabled:

Feature Description When to use
EEVDF Use EEVDF algorithm vs. Traditional Always Active (default)
PLACE_NEXT Place threads next to the current one. Improves cache affinity.
PLACEMENT_DEAD Use a deadline to place new threads. Improves predictability.
HANDLE_SLEEPERS Special handling for sleeping threads. Prevents starvation.
Core Balancing
EEVDF also manages load balancing between multiple cores:

text
At each balancing period:

1. Identify the most and least loaded cores.
2. Calculate whether it is worthwhile to migrate threads.
3. Select migration candidates based on:

- Cache affinity
- Migration cost
- Thread weight
4. Execute migrations in a controlled manner. Interaction with the System Hierarchy
THREAD Level
The scheduler operates directly on the threads:

c
// Conceptual example of how the scheduler sees a thread
THREAD:
- ID: 0x7f3a2b1c

- Parent TASK: 0x3a1b2c

- Virtual Time: 1,452,789 cycles

- Weight: 1024 (normal priority)

- Deadline: 1,455,789 cycles

- Eligible: yes

- State: executable
TASK Level
Each TASK contains multiple THREADS that share memory and resources:

text
TASK (ID: 0x3a1b2c)

├── Main THREAD (tid: 0x7f3a2b1c) - running
├── Worker THREAD (tid: 0x8b4c3d2e) - blocked in I/O
└── Helper THREAD (tid: 0x9d5e4f3a) - executable
The scheduler manages each THREAD individually, but respects TASK limits.

PROCESS Level
PROCESSES group TASKS with common policies:

PROCESS "WebServer" (pid: 1234)

├── Main TASK (limit: 100ms per slice)

├── Logging TASK (low priority)

└── Caching TASK (high priority)
WORK Level
WORKS are sets of PROCESSES that collaborate:

WORK "DatabaseSystem"

├── PROCESS "QueryProcessor"

├── PROCESS "StorageEngine"

└── PROCESS "ConnectionManager"
The WORK may have collective scaling requirements that influence individual THREADS.

Practical Conceptual Example
Scenario: Web Server with Multiple Threads
text
PROCESS "WebServer" (WORK "Application")
└── TASK "HTTPConnections"
├── THREAD 1 (weight: 1024, deadline: 1000)
├── THREAD 2 (weight: 1024, deadline: 1200)
├── THREAD 3 (weight: 512, deadline: 2500)
└── THREAD 4 (weight: 2048, deadline: 800)
Time t = 1000:

THREAD 4 has the shortest deadline (800) and is eligible → executed first

THREAD 1 has Time period 1,000, but not yet eligible

Time period t = 1,200:

THREAD 4 has already executed, now THREAD 2 has a shorter eligible time period

THREAD 1 has become eligible, but has a longer time period

Time period t = 2,000:

THREAD 3, with a lower weight, has accumulated less virtual time

Despite having a longer time period, it becomes eligible and executes

Advantages of EEVDF

1. Latency Isolation: Threads with real-time requirements have their time periods respected, even with high system load.

2. Proportional Fairness: Threads receive CPU time proportionally to their weights, without starvation.

3. Predictability: The time period mechanism makes system behavior more predictable for sensitive applications.

4. Adaptability
Adjustable parameters allow optimization for different workloads:

Low latency for interactive applications

High throughput for batch processing

Balance between the two

5. Scalability
The O(log n) insertion/removal algorithm scales well with thousands of threads.

Implementation Considerations
Complexity
Insertion/removal: O(log n) in the balanced tree

Selection: O(log n) in the worst case, O(1) average with cache

Update: O(1) per tick

Overhead
Virtual time calculations and deadlines

Balanced tree maintenance

Balancing between cores

Trade-offs
Precision vs. Overhead: More frequent calculations = better precision, higher overhead

Responsiveness vs. Throughput: Smaller slices = more responsive, less throughput

Fairness vs. Location: Migrating Threads to Load Balancing Harms Cache Affinity

Conclusion
EEVDF represents a sophisticated approach to thread scheduling, balancing fairness, latency, and throughput.
Its implementation in the kernel Bible (proc/sched_prim.c) provides a solid foundation for systems requiring predictable and efficient behavior, from high-performance servers to embedded systems with real-time requirements.

Understanding the complete hierarchy (ACTIVITY → THREAD → TASK → PROCESS → WORK) It is essential 
to understand how the scheduler interacts with the different levels of abstraction of the system.

For complete implementation details, see the proc/sched_prim.c file in the official repository:
https://github.com/1Abc342PedroGina/biblekernel
